title: Teacher Contract Offers City a Map for Other Labor Deals 

Mayor Bill de Blasio, confronting the unsettled labor agreements that have loomed over his first months in office, announced a deal on Thursday with New York City’s largest teachers’ union that would raise wages by 18 percent over nine years in exchange for a $1.3 billion reduction in health care costs.

The agreement, which includes $3.4 billion in back pay and must be ratified by the union’s 100,000 members, is a milestone moment for Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat with longstanding ties to the city’s labor movement, and city officials hope it will set a template for dozens of other outstanding contracts with the municipal work force.

It also amounted to a stark break from the tone set by the mayor’s predecessor, Michael R. Bloomberg, who had urged pay freezes and other stringent measures in an era when many cities are cutting back on wages and benefits for public employees.

Underscoring the change at City Hall, Mr. de Blasio unveiled the plan while standing side-by-side at a news conference with the union’s president, Michael Mulgrew, a close ally who had been a bête noire of Mr. Bloomberg’s.

“This is a mayor who actually respects the work force,” Mr. Mulgrew, who leads the United Federation of Teachers, said as Mr. de Blasio beamed beside him. At one point, the two warmly embraced.

Mr. de Blasio, a liberal whose mayoralty is viewed as a test case for the national left, hailed the deal as “a great day for our educators” and “a great victory for the taxpayers,” saying the agreement would provide annual raises and promote teacher retention while staying within the contours of the city’s budget.

Officials at the teachers’ union also agreed to an easing of classroom rules that have frustrated public school officials. For instance, it will be easier for the city to fire teachers who are considered poor performers, or who have been accused of sexual misconduct.

It was unclear on Thursday exactly how the union would reduce its health care costs. City and labor officials declined to give details, except to pledge that the reductions would rely on a piecemeal approach that did not involve raising workers’ premiums.

Martin Scheinman, a mediator who was lavishly praised by Mr. de Blasio for bringing the two sides to terms, would be empowered to require specific savings measures if the union does not produce the $1.3 billion in cuts, according to an official involved in the negotiations who insisted on anonymity to discuss private conversations.

A mayor’s first major labor deal often sets a pattern for the rest, and the de Blasio administration is hopeful that the framework of the deal can extend to the 151 other municipal bargaining units that must still negotiate contracts with the city that have expired.

The teachers’ union has been without a contract for four and a half years, after complaining viscerally about the Bloomberg administration’s approach to negotiations. The retroactive pay granted in the deal is the same pair of 4 percent raises that most other municipal unions received in 2009 and 2010.

Raises of an additional 10 percent spread over the remaining seven years in the new agreement would provide a pattern for deals with the other municipal unions, officials said.

If the other unions agree to similar health care savings, the spending cuts realized would total $3.4 billion, officials said — the same amount as the teachers’ union’s back pay.

But there were signs on Thursday that it could be a tough sell. Officials from unions representing uniformed workers expressed concern that the teachers’ deal did not suit their needs.

“There is no ‘one contract fits all,’ ” said a spokesman for Patrick J. Lynch, president of the police officers’ union, the Patrolmen’s Benevolent Association. Different unions, the spokesman, Albert W. O’Leary, said, “have different and specific needs for their members.”

Officials and labor leaders said that members of the Municipal Labor Committee, a consortium of public-employee groups, were hesitant to accept the reductions in health care costs agreed to by the teachers.

Mr. Mulgrew, asked on Thursday about the possible objections of his peers in other unions, issued a tart reply.

“Talk to them in a couple of days, after I talk to them,” Mr. Mulgrew said with a grin. “How’s that?”

The nine-year agreement was significantly longer than most recent municipal contracts in New York, and a way, city officials said, to spread the fiscal impact of the wage increases and retroactive payments across many years’ worth of budgets.

Yet aides to Mr. de Blasio were unable on Thursday, despite repeated entreaties from reporters, to provide the total net cost of the contract.

Fiscal watchdog groups offered approval, with some caveats, for the architecture of the plan, saying it was preferable to extend the wage payments over time.

But some were skeptical about the health care component of the agreement, saying they wanted to see more evidence that the union could achieve the promised level of savings.

“The wage part of it is relatively reasonable,” said Carol Kellermann, president of the Citizens Budget Commission. “The prospective wages are not unduly high, and seem to be respectful of the city’s fiscal health.”

Still, Ms. Kellerman added that, at the moment, the estimates for health care savings appeared “not quantifiable, stable or predictable.”

Mr. de Blasio, for his part, said he believed the agreement would be a boon to the city’s schoolchildren, saying that the changes in some work rules would allow educators to alter the length of the school year, change curriculums and increase the number of parent-teacher conferences each year.

And the mayor took pains to signal that he wanted the city’s attitude toward its teachers, and its broader public work force, to be one of cooperation and “understanding” moving forward.

Still, his next labor headache may be around the corner. Minutes before the mayor’s announcement, officials at the Patrolmen’s Benevolent Association said that talks with City Hall had fallen apart, declaring the city’s offer of three years without raises as “simply unacceptable.”

The state’s Public Employment Relations Board granted the union an impasse in its talks with the de Blasio administration, allowing its president, Mr. Lynch, to argue before a mediator that the police should receive a more generous deal than the pattern forged with the teachers’ union would suggest.
