title: Email reignites Benghazi controversy



The deadly 2012 Benghazi attack has resurfaced as a political embarrassment for the White House, with a so-called smoking gun email that documents administration efforts to blame the terrorist attack on an anti-Muslim video — forcing President Obama’s spokesman Jay Carney on the defensive for two days running.

“It’s disturbing, and perhaps criminal, that these documents were kept from the public,” House Oversight Committee Chairman Darrell Issa (R-Calif.) said yesterday. “It comes in a week in which the American people have learned that you cannot believe what the White House says … and you cannot believe what the president says.”

Carney insisted the email released Tuesday by Washington-based Judicial Watch referred to unrest across the region.

“The email and the talking points were not about Benghazi,” Carney said. “They were about the general situation in the Muslim world.”

Sean Dunagan of Judicial Watch called that claim “ludicrous,” telling Boston Herald Radio yesterday the email to former U.N. Ambassador Susan Rice was written three days after the attacks and two days before Rice made her rounds on Sunday morning talk shows to discuss Benghazi.

The email, with the subject line “RE: PREP CALL with Susan, Saturday at 4:00 pm ET,” states as a “goal” to “underscore that these protests are rooted in an Internet video, and not a broader failure or policy.”

“There is no way that would not have been the White House’s focus,” Dunagan said about Benghazi. “They can make that claim, but personally, looking at the timeline, I don’t find that credible.

“It’s reasonable to assume that one of the initial avenues investigated might have been that this was similar to what was happening in other countries, but by the 14th, that was known not to be true,” said Dunagan.

The email, released to Judicial Watch under the Freedom of Information Act, was not among emails the White House released last year as it tried to clear itself. Dunagan noted that the email’s author, deputy national security adviser Ben Rhodes, was previously an Obama campaign speech writer.
