title: Jason Chaffetz: Benghazi email ‘major’

Rep. Jason Chaffetz on Thursday blasted the Obama administration on Benghazi, calling it a “major, major scandal” and saying Jay Carney’s comments were “laughable.”

“We have a major, major scandal,” the Utah Republican said on Fox News. “We have lies that are perpetuated by this White House.”

Chaffetz’s appearance came less than an hour before the House Oversight Committee, of which he is a member, was scheduled to hold a hearing on the Sept. 11, 2012 attacks on the U.S. consulate in Benghazi, Libya.

Chaffetz also said White House press secretary Jay Carney’s comments at a Wednesday press briefing were “embarrassing.”

“Despite the White House saying this is a phony scandal — it was done a long time ago, what difference does it make — you have the White House press secretary in an embarrassing moment try to say the Ben Rhodes email had nothing to do with Benghazi. That is absolutely laughable.”

At the briefing, Carney said a recent email uncovered by Judicial Watch “was explicitly not about Benghazi.” The email in question, sent by deputy national security adviser Ben Rhodes to top Obama administration officials, provided talking points for then-U.N. Ambassador Susan Rice’s appearances on the Sunday talk shows after the attacks.

Chaffetz also went after Hillary Clinton, who was serving as secretary of state when the attacks occurred. He said Clinton offered little support immediately after the incident, and that she “didn’t even speak with the president that night.” He said the administration “tried to come up with this lame story” that they couldn’t have gotten resources or help to the consulate in time, saying he is “worried that they didn’t even try to get there.”

The congressman said a select committee might be necessary to further investigate the attacks.

Chaffetz has been a frequent critic of the administration on its handling of Benghazi. In January, he accused the administration of “misleading the world and the people of the United States of America about what really happened.”

Read more: http://www.politico.com/story/2014/05/jason-chaffetz-benghazi-email-major-106231.html#ixzz30axUaqVC
