title: African Bird Uses False Calls to Deceive and Steal, Study Shows

While the call of the drongo bird is usually used by meerkats and starlings as a warning of danger - the drongo makes these calls with another purpose in mind - to steal the dinner of its listeners.

Researchers have found that the drongos sometimes make false alarm calls - causing their listeners to drop their dinner and flee the scene, according to National Geographic.

The birds then swoop in and make off with their victim's meal. 

The birds are notorious among wildlife observers for their thieving ways - however, sometimes it fails - much like the fable, 'the boy who cried wolf'. 

Researchers report in Science that when that happens, the sneaky birds deploy another trick: They imitate their victim's alarm call or that of another species.

The discovery reveals that drongos are attentive to the responses of their target.

"It's a really cool study," John Marzluff, a wildlife biologist at the University of Washington in Seattle, told National Geographic.

"It's the most sophisticated example of vocal deception, outside of my own species, that I've ever seen."

The birds could be employing a type of sophisticated cognition that researchers usually reserve for humans only, writes National Geographic.

Tom Flower, an evolutionary biologist at South Africa's University of Cape Town, studied the birds' habits by habituating and banding about 200 of the birds in the Kalahari Desert.

Drongos perch high up on tree limbs - meaning they have an advantage when it comes to spotting danger - and meerkats and other creatures have learned to pay attention to their calls.

The animals listen out for the drongos call - racing for cover if the drongo warns of danger.

"They generally react the same way to a drongo's alarm call as they do to the alarm call of a member of their own species," Flower told National Geographic.

Scientists say the drongo's call is beneficial to eavesdroppers: Because they don't have to spend as much time looking out for predators, they have more time to forage, writes National Geographic.

However, sometimes the drongos' alarms are false.

Drongos get as much as 23 percent of their daily food by making false alarms and then stealing the meals of their targets.

While the drongo can usually trick its target with its own call - the target stops responding if it happens too often. 

This is when the bird tries another tactic - vocal mimicry, writes National Geographic.

Flower discovered the drongos have a store of alarm calls of numerous species, including birds and mammals. 

Some of those species make a variety of warning calls - as do the drongos-giving them a total of 51 different alarm calls.

The birds are able to "cry wolf for longer periods than if they simply repeated the same alarm call," Dorothy Cheney, primatologist at the University of Pennsylvania, told National Geographic.

Flower doesn't know what the birds are thinking as they switch among their manipulative calls, but he doubts that they're changing calls intentionally, writes National Geographic.

"They're paying attention to their targets, and they change what they're doing based on the feedback they receive," he says.

Overall, the study adds to the "mounting evidence that animals have a lot more linguistic and cognitive capabilities than they're usually given credit for," Con Slobodchikoff, animal behaviorist and emeritus professor at Northern Arizona University, in Flagstaff told National Geographic.
