title: Donald Sterling’s Race Problem—And Ours

A few months ago, on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, I was rushing along the street one morning when an older white man offered me a handshake and a cordial “Good morning.” His warm greeting was followed by what he meant as a sincere compliment: “You did a wonderful job painting that stoop yesterday.” I blinked in confusion, and he recognized his mistake. “Do I have the wrong one?” he asked. I assured him that I had definitely not painted his stairs the previous day, and continued across town, somewhat bemused by the encounter.

The episode stuck with me because it so perfectly embodied a kind of vintage racism, one in which all members of a particular racial group are entirely interchangeable; to respond with anger would be entirely beside the point. For many years, I was puzzled by African-Americans who collected Sambo and Mammy figurines, plantation grotesques whose distorted features expressed the prevailing arguments for slavery and segregation. But my sidewalk encounter suggested a possible rationale for these purchases: they recalled an era when people were at least candid about their racial views.

This afternoon, Adam Silver, the N.B.A. commissioner, announced that the Los Angeles Clippers owner Donald Sterling, who was recorded telling a girlfriend that he didn’t want her to bring black people to his games, will be banned for life and fined $2.5 million, and that the league will attempt to force Sterling to sell the team. Faced with grumblings about a player strike or diminished attendance during the playoffs, the league had no choice but to act quickly.

In matters of race, Malcolm X argued, American politics were divided not between liberals and conservatives but between “wolves” and “foxes”—between those whose overt contempt for black people was clear and those who successfully cloaked their disdain. To the extent that more commentary is required on the controversy surrounding Sterling, one can only point to how matters have evolved in the years since Malcolm X’s pronouncement. The undying creed of American racial optimism—bolstered anew by the election of a black President—has led us to a place where the usual principles have been inverted, where words speak louder than actions. In short, the foxes won.

We know that racism remains, as ever, a fixed element in American society. And yet, the actual articulation of racist views shocks the collective conscience—or, at least, inspires us to behave as if it has. Last month, when Paul Ryan’s lament over the laziness of “inner-city men” sparked a smaller controversy, he followed his remarks with a barely credible, though nonetheless effective, disclaimer that he wasn’t referring to any particular racial group. What makes headlines—whether in Cliven Bundy’s clueless speculation about the benefits of slavery or Donald Sterling’s Jim Crow code for his girlfriend’s Instagram—is not the presence of bigotry but the absence of subtlety.

The outrage that has emerged since the tape of Sterling’s remarks was first made public seems to betray a kind of willful collective naïveté. Our public shock suggests a belief that the views expressed by Sterling are out of the ordinary—despite the evidence indicating otherwise, despite the visible disparities between races in every meaningful statistic, and despite the protestations of those who are subjected to the dictates of race in this country.

The publication of the tape containing Sterling’s muddled racial thinking is indeed news, but the hypertensive reaction to his views inadvertently highlights our feeble understanding of how race still works in American society. Sterling has most commonly been compared to Marge Schott, the eccentric Cincinnati Reds owner whose racial views led Major League Baseball to suspend her on two separate occasions. It’s an apt comparison, but not for the reasons we suspect. Schott was castigated for referring to two outfielders as her “million-dollar niggers.” The statement, along with a bizarre defense of Hitler, were enough for Major League Baseball to issue her a first suspension, in 1993. Yet it went virtually unnoticed that these comments were revealed in the midst of a deposition about her unofficial policy of not hiring African-American workers. Sterling’s own racial history seems too perfect an illustration of this to have not been scripted as part of a social psychology experiment. Years of actual, tangibly racist actions that had real effects on the lives of minorities trying to find housing were so inconsequential that they didn’t even preclude him from being honored by the local N.A.A.C.P. A single, insipid conversation in which he tells his mistress that associating with black people will ruin her chances of passing as a “delicate” white woman threatens to derail his business career.

The N.B.A.’s decision was based, Silver said, solely upon Sterling’s comments that became public last weekend, which only further confounds the problems here. The lifetime ban limits the damage that Sterling can do to the N.B.A.’s reputation. But no punishment can resolve the deeper question of why his actions were tolerated for so long—or of how many other team owners have similar views, and perhaps similar histories, but retain the good sense not to offend our sensibilities by talking about them.