title: Aaron Hernandez indicted in two jail incidents

MASSACHUSETTS prosecutors said yesterday former New England Patriots tight end Aaron Hernandez has been indicted in a February jail assault and in a November threat at the jail.

The Bristol County district attorney's office said Hernandez was indicted yesterday on charges of assault and battery and threats to do bodily harm. No further details have been released.

Hernandez is held without bail at the Bristol County House of Correction in Dartmouth after pleading not guilty to murder in the June 2013 death of semiprofessional football player Odin Lloyd, who was dating the sister of Hernandez's girlfriend.

The county sheriff said Hernandez was involved in a Feb. 25 scuffle with another inmate but neither required medical attention.

Young was given a tryout this week at the Browns' 3-day minicamp. The team also signed quarterback Tyler Thigpen.

Young, 30, made two Pro Bowls during his five seasons with Tennessee, which drafted him with the No. 3 overall pick in 2006.



General manager Jerry Reese said that Manning's left ankle surgery will keep him "out of spring ball."

"We will not rush him back," Reese said. "We want him for the summer - that's most important to us."

Rice pleaded not guilty yesterday to aggravated assault stemming from a February incident with his then-girlfriend in an Atlantic City casino elevator. He applied for New Jersey's pretrial intervention program, which allows first-time offenders to have charges against them dismissed upon meeting certain conditions.

If Rice is rejected for the program, prosecutors have offered a plea bargain that would spare him jail time if he participates in anger-management counseling.

Security video obtained by TMZ Sports shows Rice removing the motionless body of Janay Palmer from the elevator. Palmer, who later married Rice, didn't comment as the two walked into the courthouse.

"He's ashamed of his conduct and he's sorry for what he did," attorney Michael Diamondstein told reporters outside the courthouse.