title: Mitt Romney to endorse Monica Wehby in Oregon

Mitt Romney will endorse Monica Wehby Thursday in the Oregon GOP Senate primary.

“Dr. Wehby is the kind of leader Oregon needs — someone who has strong experience outside of government, who can bring trust and accountability back to Washington,” the 2012 Republican nominee says in a forthcoming statement, shared first with POLITICO. “Dr. Wehby is putting forward a positive and conservative vision for her campaign that will make Oregonians proud.”

National Republicans are enthusiastic about Wehby, a Portland pediatric neurosurgeon who they hope can put the blue state in play if 2014 becomes a wave election.

Before she can take on Sen. Jeff Merkley, the first-time candidate must defeat state Rep. Jason Conger in a May 20 primary. In the nomination fight, Wehby has a huge cash advantage, the backing of The Oregonian newspaper and has been running compelling TV ads. Democrats point to a recent internal poll for Merkley that showed her trailing the incumbent by 20 percentage points and running only neck and neck with Conger in the primary.

This is the latest primary in which Romney has chosen to play. He’s supporting Joni Ernst in a crowded GOP field for Iowa Senate. Earlier this week, he backed Neel Kashkari for California governor. Last week, he endorsed Tony Strickland for a House seat in the Golden State. And the Chamber has been running ads featuring Romney’s support for Rep. Mike Simpson (R-Idaho) over a primary challenger.

Wehby was enthusiastic about getting Romney’s backing, which she cited as evidence that her race is in play.

“He and I share in the belief that Washington, D.C., needs leaders who have excelled in fields other than politics — that the establishment of a permanent political class is not what our founders intended,” she said in a statement.

Fifteen sitting Republican senators have cut checks to Wehby’s campaign: John Thune, Richard Burr, Orrin Hatch, Rob Portman, Johnny Isakson, Mitch McConnell, Bob Corker, Susan Collins, John Barrasso, Lisa Murkowski, John McCain, Kelly Ayotte, Tom Coburn, Lamar Alexander and Saxby Chambliss.

Also contributing to Wehby: former Sen. Jon Kyl, former Republican National Committee Chairman Haley Barbour, and GOP Reps. James Lankford of Oklahoma and Tom Price of Georgia.


