title: Microsoft creates 400 new high-tech jobs in Vancouver 

Microsoft Canada on Thursday announced a new annual $90-million investment in cash and talent in downtown Vancouver as it focuses more of its business in this country on cloud and mobile services.

Beginning this summer, the investment will mean about 400 new jobs added over the next year. Coupled with the jobs was the creation of a new “Microsoft Canada Excellence Centre,” which will be the anchor tenant of the Pacific Centre redevelopment in heart of downtown Vancouver. Expected to be ready by 2015, the company has signed an 11-year lease.

“Part of our vision in Canada to hire the best and brightest talent, and we look at Vancouver as the perfect hub to make investment,” says Microsoft Canada President Janet Kennedy. The new jobs will be working mostly in the company’s Applications and Services Group, responsible for research and development for Microsoft Office, Office 365, Skype, Bing, MSN, Exchange, Yammer and Advertising platforms. “This is really the future [these jobs are] going to be in the world of mobile-first, cloud-first.

“We’ve been undergoing an immense transformation of the company,” Ms. Kennedy told The Globe and Mail in an interview ahead of the announcement. She was told when she arrived in October that “cloud has not taken off in Canada,” but enterprise clients of Microsoft’s cloud services already include Lululemon, Tim Hortons, Air Canada and Rogers Communications.

Mayor Gregor Robertson and provincial officials joined Microsoft for the announcement. Federal Minister of Industry James Moore, who is also the Minister Responsible for British Columbia, issued a statement: “I welcome this important investment ... Our government’s top priority remains creating jobs and growth, and promoting Canada’s digital economy is an essential part of our plan.”

Microsoft set up shop in B.C. in 2007, and currently has about 300 employees working on video games (Gears of War, Halo), television products (NFL on Xbox) and the like. This announcement doubles Redmond’s, footprint in the region, chosen in part because it shares a close geography and time zone with HQ in Redmond.

Ms. Kennedy is particularly excited with the second part of the announcement: the creation of “Foundry Vancouver,” a paid 16-week internship program for 50 university students recruited from across Canada. “This is a personal passion of mine, I’m the product of two teachers,” she says.

Modelled after the successful “Foundry” partnership Microsoft struck with MIT in Boston, the students will eventually be working with the new ASG division. Microsoft already supports higher education in Canada in a number of ways; including offering science departments software and cloud support at no cost, and university students can now access Office 365 for free, which is about a $30-million investment in Canada. The first group of 25 Foundry summer students starts work May 5.

“Why is a company like Microsoft making this really enormous investment? We are really focused on the opportunity divide for young people,” said Karen Jones, Microsoft’s deputy general counsel. “It’s really part of this broader effort,” to address the skills gap in STEM education. Those efforts include the YouthSpark program that has promoted STEM education and innovative career paths for more than 5 million kids in Canada since its launch in 2012. In addition, Microsoft grants for Kids Learning Code and Pathways to Education will boost its commitment B.C. youth and economic development through 2015.
