title: Microsoft to open new centre in Vancouver, 400 new jobs

Microsoft  announced Thursday plans to open a new training and development centre in Vancouver that will more than double its workforce here with 400 new jobs and make the city home to Microsoft’s largest centre in Canada.

The new Microsoft Canada Excellence Centre, which is projected to deliver

a $90 million boost annually to BC’s economy, will open in late 2015 in a new state-of-the art facility in Vancouver’s Pacific Centre.

“We are very excited,” said Microsoft Canada president Janet Kennedy, said of Thursday announcement that will see Microsoft become the anchor tenant in the redevelopment of Pacific Centre,

“Our headquarters are in Mississauga but with this announcement today and the more than doubling the number of employees we will have in this city, Vancouver will become the largest employee base for us in the country.”

Microsoft’s expanded presence will also include ‘Foundry Vancouver,’  a program that will provide 50 students annually from Canadian universities with paid 16-week internships starting this summer.

“As a global company we are always assessing where we should be in the world, where’s the talent, where’s the opportunity, where the right combination of factors is to consider growing our business and our workforce,” said Karen Jones, Microsoft’s deputy general counsel, who helped bring the program to Canada. “A year-and-a-half, two years ago we started looking at that and we looked at various locations around the world and Vancouver rose to the top.”

Jones said Microsoft’s increased investment in Vancouver reflects a resurgence in the province’s tech sector, a sector Microsoft expects will continue to grow.

“That’s our bet, we’re excited to be helping to lead that,” she said. “We think all the ingredients are here.

“The broadening of the kind of work we’re doing here, beyond gaming, out to really propel Vancouver into additional development and additional innovation. That’s part of the bet we’re making and this represents a really strong endorsement of Vancouver.”

The jobs, which will focus on Microsoft’s Applications and Services Group, are in addition to the company’s current 350-person workforce in Vancouver. Microsoft products that fall under the group’s responsibilities include Microsoft Office, Office 365, SharePoint, Exchange, Yammer, Lync, Skype, Bing, Bing Apps, MSN and Advertising platforms.

“Vancouver is a vibrant international hub for technology development with growth potential given its attractive location, amenities, reputation and proximity to top British Columbia universities and a highly-educated and diverse workforce and population,”  Janet Kennedy, president of Microsoft Canada said in a release.  “This investment will enable us to create a world-class center of training and innovation that will have a positive ripple effect across the local, provincial and national economy.”

Microsoft’s workforce expansion will begin this summer, with the addition of approximately 150 new employees, in long-term and rotational positions. The centre will focus on software and services engineering, Microsoft’s Applications and Services Group and programs and solutions management.

Microsoft has been expanding its gaming business in Vancouver, in 2009 acquiring Big Park Studios and launching Black Tusk Studios in 2012. Microsoft’s gaming business in Vancouver accounts for 300 fulltime jobs, with employees working on products and services for Microsoft’s Xbox and the company’s other sectors.

Microsoft’s new investment in Vancouver is expected to total $90 million annually, according to a recent study by Ernst & Young LLP. The report predicts it will generate more than $181.4 million per year in economic growth and new job opportunities.

High tech jobs in BC deliver higher salaries than the average for the province, with the average salary for a high tech worker at $1,440 a week, 60 per cent higher than the provincial average of $870.

BC’s tech sector accounts for approximately  7.6 per cent of the province’s GDP according to the latest figures available from BC Stats.

Despite Microsoft’s growth and other expansion in BC’s tech sector, including Amazon’s plan to expand here, the province’s high tech sector lags behind other Canadian provinces, ranking fourth in terms of employment, international exports, revenue and business counts, according to BC Stats 2013 high tech report. However, it had the third highest number of employees after Ontario and Ontario and it is tied for second in average weekly earnings.
